# Data Modeling using Postgres & ETL pipeline using Python

Data Modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. 
Creating a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. Our role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. 

## Description
Creating a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. Our role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. 
We will define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

## Data:

### **Song Dataset**
Songs dataset is a subset of [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/).

Sample Record :
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### **Log Dataset**
Logs dataset is generated by [Event Simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim).

Sample Record :
```
{"artist": null, "auth": "Logged In", "firstName": "Walter", "gender": "M", "itemInSession": 0, "lastName": "Frye", "length": null, "level": "free", "location": "San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA", "method": "GET","page": "Home", "registration": 1540919166796.0, "sessionId": 38, "song": null, "status": 200, "ts": 1541105830796, "userAgent": "\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"", "userId": "39"}
```

### Files used on the project:

1. **data** folder nested at the home of the project, where all needed jsons reside.
2. **sql_queries.py** contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the files bellow.
3. **create_tables.py** drops and creates tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
4. **etl.py** reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. 

### Break down of steps

1 Wrote DROP, CREATE and INSERT query statements in sql_queries.py

2 Run in console
 ```
python create_tables.py
```

The schema I used is the Star Schema: 
There is one main **fact table** containing all the measures associated to each event (user song plays), and 4 **dimensional tables**, each with a primary key that is being referenced from the fact table.


#### Fact Table
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id (INT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of each user song play 
- start_time (DATE) NOT NULL: Timestamp of beggining of user activity
- user_id (INT) NOT NULL: ID of user
- level (TEXT): User level {free | paid}
- song_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Song played
- artist_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Artist of the song played
- session_id (INT): ID of the user Session 
- location (TEXT): User location 
- user_agent (TEXT): Agent used by user to access Sparkify platform

#### Dimension Tables
**users** - users in the app
- user_id (INT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of user
- first_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Name of user
- last_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Last Name of user
- gender (TEXT): Gender of user {M | F}
- level (TEXT): User level {free | paid}

**songs** - songs in music database
- song_id (TEXT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of Song
- title (TEXT) NOT NULL: Title of Song
- artist_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of song Artist
- year (INT): Year of song release
- duration (FLOAT) NOT NULL: Song duration in milliseconds

**artists** - artists in music database
- artist_id (TEXT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of Artist
- name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Name of Artist
- location (TEXT): Name of Artist city
- lattitude (FLOAT): Lattitude location of artist
- longitude (FLOAT): Longitude location of artist

**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
- start_time (DATE) PRIMARY KEY: Timestamp of row
- hour (INT): Hour associated to start_time
- day (INT): Day associated to start_time
- week (INT): Week of year associated to start_time
- month (INT): Month associated to start_time 
- year (INT): Year associated to start_time
- weekday (TEXT): Name of week day associated to start_time

3 Run etl in console, and verify results:
 ```
python etl.py
```
